---
layout: post
title: Find out symmetry from RMC fitted supercell
subtitle:
tags: [scattering, total scattering, solid state physics]
author: Yuanpeng Zhang
comments: true
use_math: true
---

In the reverse Monte Carlo (RMC) modeling, there is no constraint of symmetry exerted on the model.
Once the initial unit cell is expanded to a supercell, the symmetry constraint will be removed and
the model will be purely driven by the data together with some other physical or chemical
constraint. The purpose is to provide the model with as large configuration space as possible to
explore and therefore it is hopeful that the model will be able to catch the distortion feature that
is otherwise not accessible from the unit cell based routines. However, sometimes we may be still
interested in the symmetry of the resulted supercell configuration from the RMC fitting. With this
regard, the `findsym` program [1] developed by H. T. Stoles and B. J. Campbell, et al. could be used
to extract the symmetry from a `P1` cell.

There is an on-line version of the program available at [2]. Also, there is a command-line version
of the program which can be found at [3]. The download is password protected, please get in touch
with either myself (in which case I will get in touch with the developer for permission) or one can
directly contact the developer for download.

To use the program, one can follow the process below.

1. Use the included `findsym_cifinput` program to generate the input file for running `findsym`.

   ```bash
   ./findsym_cifinput CIF_FILE_NAME.cif > CIF_FILE_NAME.inp
   ```

2. Grab the generated input file (`CIF_FILE_NAME.inp` in this example) and run `findsym`.

   ```bash
   ./findsym < CIF_FILE_NAME.inp > CIF_FILE_NAME.out
   ```

   Most of the settings in the input file generated above should not need any retouching, apart from
   the tolerance settings as presented in the head part of the input file,

   ```
   !useKeyWords
   !title
   CIF file mn3sn_500.cif
   !latticeTolerance
    0.900E-04
   !atomicPositionTolerance
    0.500E-01
   !atomicPositionMaxTolerance
    0.330E+00
   !occupationTolerance
    0.100E-02
   ...
   ```

   The several tolerance settings here specify how tolerant we are for the various structure
   aspects. The more tolerant we are, the higher chance we will have to extract a higher symmetry,
   and vice versa. Imagine that we have zero tolerance, then a tiny amount of distortion from the
   ideal position or lattice parameter will be considered as lowering the symmetry and thus the
   extracted symmetry will tend to always end up with the `P1` symmetry. In practice, one can play
   around with the tolerance settings and project a heat map to get a feel about the symmetry
   variation as the change of tolerance.

References
===

[1] H. T. Stokes and D. M. Hatch, J.Appl.Cryst.(2005).38,237-238.

[2] [https://stokes.byu.edu/iso/findsym.php](https://stokes.byu.edu/iso/findsym.php)

[3] [http://bit.ly/3seZjtR](http://bit.ly/3seZjtR)