---
layout: post
title: Local Development Environment Setup for NOVA
tags: [dev, technical, ORNL]
author: Yuanpeng Zhang
comments: true
use_math: true
---

This post will go over the steps for setting up the local development for `nova`, which is a frontend interface platform at `ORNL` that interacts with the backend `Galaxy` workflow platform.

- First, set up the `conda` environment,

	```bash
	[CONDA_SUBDIR=osx-64] conda create -n pdiffvis -c conda-forge -c mantid python=3.10 mantid poetry
	conda activate pdiffvis
	```

	`[CONDA_SUBDIR=osx-64]` (without the bracket) is only necessary for Mac machines with `ARM` architecture.

- Then run `poetry install`

- Next we want to mock the directory structure on ORNL Analysis cluster. On Linux, we can use `sudo` privilege to create `/SNS` and `/HFIR` directories and all the sub-directories. On MacOS, one cannot create directories under `/` even with `sudo` privilege so one has to use the following trick,

	- Populate the file `/etc/synthetic.conf` with

		```
		SNS	Users/y8z/SNS
		```

		where `y8z` is my user name.

		> Attention: the white space in there is necessarily a `Tab`.

		> There is NO `/` in front of `Users/y8z/SNS`.

	- Create the `SNS` directory under our home directory.

	- Run the following command,

		```bash
		/System/Library/Filesystems/apfs.fs/Contents/Resources/apfs.util -t
		```

		The command above would create a soft link from `/SNS` to `/Users/y8z/SNS`. Then we can populate with files under `/Users/y8z/SNS` following the same structure as on Analysis.

		> If the command above for some reason fails, we can try to reboot the machine after which the soft link should have been created automatically.

- Next, run the following command to configure `pre-commit` so that any time codes are committed, some actions such as format checking will be triggered automatically before pushing the codes to the repo.

	```bash
	poetry run pre-commit install
	```
- Then it should be ready so we can run,

	```bash
	poetry run app
	```

	to start the app, which will automatically launch the browser to see the app.

- Once we are happy with the local changes with the codes, we can push the codes to the repo so that it can be deployed into the `nova` test environment. Then the app can be accessed from [`nova-test.ornl.gov`](https://nova-test.ornl.gov). To deploy, we need,

	- Edit `pyproject.toml` to update the version

	- Commit and push the local changes

	- Run `poetry run deploy-tool`

		> docker has to be installed for this command to work.